Earlier this year I learnt that the Viola da Gamba Society (VdGS) was having a meeting in Chichester in October. For a while I had noticed that while there are various gatherings for violin makers, guitar makers and other instrument makers, there is very little for Viol makers. I started to talk to two of my tutors at West Dean – Shem Mackey and Arnaud Giral – about the idea of hosting a symposium at West Dean to coincide with the VdGS day.

On October 4th, we welcomed a set of speakers, makers and musicians to the Old Dairy, West Dean, where the musical instrument workshops are located. In all there were six speakers: four there as makers and two as musicians. We had around 45 attendees in person were joined by 25 online, dialing in from Europe, America and the UK. There were a wide variety of attendees including a number of makers, players as well as current and previous students. One student, Ward Albert, came from Belgium just for the symposium.

 
Figure 1 - Shem Mackey addressing the symposium

The day kicked off with Shem Mackey and Luke Challinor talking about Joachim Tielke’s Barytons. I’m sure most people reading this will know that a Baryton is a Bass Viol with the addition of one or two further sets of metal strings (“manuals”) that can be plucked, but also act as sympathetic strings. Shem gave a detailed overview of Tielke’s four extant Barytons, one recently uncovered. In addition to the detailed presentation, Shem had obtained permission to bring along an original neck fragment from a Tielke baryton. This was on display and available for examination. After taking us through the details of the remaining Tielke barytons, Shem gave a whistle-stop description of the making of a baryton commissioned by Luke. I got the feeling that Shem only scratched the surface of the challenges of making this incredibly complex instrument with three manuals. 

Luke then outlined his decision making process for identifying the instrument to commission, diving into his research into Baryton’s and their music. A significant highlight was hearing the instrument played by Luke, demonstrating both the amazing acoustic soundscape it creates, as well as the amazing technique that Luke uses to pluck the metal strings at the same time as fingering the fretboard and bowing the gut strings. Wow.

 
Figure 2 - Luke Challinor playing Baryton

The next talk was by Nelly Poidevin, discussing the use of alternative European and tropical woods for bow making. Nelly is an expert in historic bows, and she explained how her allergy to Pernambuco has led to a lifetime of exploring different woods for bows. Taking us from the earliest extant bow, through the medieval, renaissance, baroque and into the classical era, Nelly identified the wide varieties of woods used before Pernambuco became so prevalent. Details on the physical composition of wood and the impact on the resulting bows led into a deep dive into specific attributes of numerous wood types. Nelly finished by showing her scientific approach to recording the properties of different woods and bows that she uses in her making. I was left feeling that Nelly had only just scratched the surface of the data and knowledge she has collected in many years of investigation and experimentation. 
 Figure 3 - Nelly Poidevin discussing wood for bows

We strolled across the grounds to the main house where we had lunch in the Oak Hall, which enabled all the participants to chat and compare notes. In fact, many people identified the breaks as being one of the most important parts of the day.

After lunch, Jane Julier and Henrik Persson gave a detailed presentation of a viol by Edward Lewis, 1703. Jane described how the instrument had been handed over to luthier John Topham in a bag, in terrible condition. During lockdown, John decided to restore the instrument. As he started to take it apart to repair it, he ended up with even more pieces – the front ended up as 6 pieces. The painstaking restoration was beautifully documented in photos, interspersed with Henrik playing period music on the instrument. Jane and Henrik took us back to St Paul’s Alley where Lewis worked, explaining the historical and social context. Finally, Jane drew some interesting parallels between sacred geometry and Lewis’s purfling patterns. Her theory that these might protect the instrument in unknown ways divided the audience: I personally found it both fascinating and engaging.

The final talk of the day was Tilman Muthesius giving us a detailed look at Stainer’s viols. Tilman gave us a detailed analysis of a number of Stainer’s viols, many still in private hands. The analysis dived into the carved heads, scrolls, c- and f-holes, unusually thick soundpost plates and many other characteristics of these viols. Tilman ended the presentation with details of his method of joining the neck with wedges. The resulting neck joint resembles the historic neck joints. Tilman’s short film demonstrating the procedure was so interesting we watched it twice!
 Figure 4 - Tilman Muthesius on Stainer's viols

Although that was the end of the formal meeting as well as the streamed portion, the in-person attendees then took a tour of the workshop. Makers had been invited to bring instruments and a table with more than ten viols was a centre of discussion. Visiting makers took the chance to review and give feedback to students work, as well as having many discussions amongst themselves. NRI were also present with a table of gut strings for sale.

After dinner, we returned to the Oak Hall where Henrik and Luke had prepared an informal concert of music for Bass Viol and Baryton. Around 50 makers, students and tutors from West Dean were able to attend and for several it was their first opportunity to hear the music and instruments of this period. The music was simply gorgeous and made a resounding end to a wonderful day.
 Figure 5 - Henrik Persson and Luke Challinor in concert

Many thanks to all the people who made the day possible: the speakers and players, the West Dean organisation and the many volunteers who helped out. 

The website is available at: https://violmaking.org and some recordings of the streaming will be available shortly. Please contact paul@fremantle.org for the password.


